# IoT-based-Smart-Health-Monitoring-SystemHealth monitoring is the major problem in today’s
Health monitoring is the major problem in today’s world. Due to lack of proper health monitoring, patient suffer from serious health issues. There are lots of IoT devices now days to monitor the health of patient over internet. Health experts are also taking advantage of these smart devices to keep an eye on their patients. With tons of new healthcare technology start-ups, IoT is rapidly revolutionizing the healthcare industry.

Here in this project, we will make an IoT based Health Monitoring System which records the patient heart beat rate and body temperature and also send an email/SMS alert whenever those readings goes beyond critical values. Pulse rate and body temperature readings are recorded over ThingSpeak and Google sheets so that patient health can be monitored from anywhere in the world over internet. A panic will also be attached so that patient can press it on emergency to send email/sms to their relatives. In this project, we are monitoring various parameters of the patient using the internet of things. In the patient monitoring system based on the Internet of Things project, the real-time parameters of a patient’s health are sent to the cloud using Internet connectivity. These parameters are sent to a remote Internet location so that users can view these details from anywhere in the world. In the IOT based system, details of the patient’s health can be seen by many users.

To operate an IOT based health monitoring system project, you need a WiFi connection. The microcontroller or the Arduino board connects to the Wi-Fi network using a Wi-Fi module. This project will not work without a working WiFi network. You can create a WiFi zone using a WiFi module or you can even create a WiFi zone using Hotspot on your smartphone. The Arduino UNO board continuously reads input from these 3 senses. Then it sends this data to the cloud by sending this data to a particular URL/IP address. Then this action of sending data to IP is repeated after a particular interval of time. For example in this project, we have sent data after every 30 seconds. Arduino collects real time health data from pulse sensor which measures heartbeat in minutes or BPM (beats per minute). A digital temperature sensor connected to Arduino measures body temperature of the patient. A buzzer produces auditory beeps when the patient’s heartbeat occurs / detected. This gives a brief insight to a healthcare professional how a patient’s heart is performing in a particular health condition. Abnormal heartbeats can be detected by just listening to the beeps. A generic ESP8266 IoT module is connect to Arduino via UART, it is responsible for connecting the machine to internet and also for sending health data to a IoT server (Thing speak) for storing and monitoring. This circuit is not only capable of sending patient’s health data to a server but also can show real time data on a 16×2 LCD display. 

This is useful for a healthcare professional who is actively monitoring a patient on site.
